Change management models can help break down
complicated change processes into straightforward steps.
This video explores one of the best known options,
Kotter's Eight-Step Change Model.
Developed by Dr. John Kotter,
a Harvard University business professor,
this model can serve as a useful roadmap
for implementing organizational change.
Kotter's model emphasizes that change
is most likely to succeed when employees support it.
That's why this model focuses on creating ownership
and buy-in from team members.
The model's eight steps are distributed across three phases.
The first phase, defining the change, sets the stage.
This phase focuses on developing a vision,
understanding the why behind the change,
and leveraging enthusiastic early adopters.
The second phase, implementing the change,
starts when leaders engage the entire organization,
rallying employees around the change.
This phase helps everyone understand their roles
and establishes change-related goals.
The final phase, securing the change,
builds on early momentum to cement the change
as a permanent part of the organization.
Now that you understand the basic phases of the model,
let's look at the steps in each phase in more detail,
starting with phase one, defining the change.
The first step of this phase
is to create a sense of urgency.
During this step, change leaders convey
why the change is necessary,
play out possible scenarios and outcomes,
and share evidence to support the change.
In step two, building a core coalition,
change leaders gather those most likely
to advocate for the change.
Coalition members should have high levels of social capital,
status, or expertise, along with enthusiasm for the change.
The final step of phase one is forming a strategic vision.
Change leaders and coalition members
need to explain how the change aligns with company values
in this third step.
At the end of phase one,
leaders should concentrate on sharing strategies
for achieving the change and describing how things will look
once the change has been implemented.
In other words, what does the ideal future look like
after the change?
Once the first phase is complete,
the model progresses to phase two, implementing the change,
which encompasses steps four through six
of the eight-step model.
Let's explore those now.
Step four of Kotter's model is communicating the vision.
Here, change discussions expand to a wider audience.
Company-wide updates should start now,
emphasizing enthusiasm for the change
and modeling behaviors that support it.
Step five focuses on removing barriers.
Obstacles to successful change may become apparent now.
That gives leaders the chance to address setbacks,
like employee resistance, work disruptions caused by change,
or waning enthusiasm.
Step six, generating short-term wins,
uses early success to motivate the team.
In this step, change leaders find opportunities
to achieve and celebrate short-term goals
associated with the change.
What does a short-term win look like?
Imagine an organization has set the long-term change goal
of reducing its carbon footprint.
A short-term win could be completing a review
of company travel practices
and replacing non-essential travel
with virtual meetings and online training sessions.
Some of the cost savings that reduced travel generates
could then be used to reward employees
for embracing the change.
The final phase of Kotter's model is securing the change.
As the team nears the finish line,
steps seven and eight provide the push
to make the change permanent.
Step seven is sustaining acceleration.
The change is now in motion.
While it might be tempting to ease intensity,
Kotter's model reminds us
that now is the time to go full tilt.
Continue to generate quick wins, listen to feedback,
and adjust as you learn along the way.
The final step, step eight, is instituting the change.
The change should move from adopting new ideas
to just the way we do things around here.
After the change becomes a permanent fixture
of the organization, anchor it by sharing success stories
and rewarding team members who played an integral role
in the initiative's success.
Kotter's eight-step model has endured
as a go-to change management model for over two decades.
Why?
Because the framework breaks down
complicated change processes into clear, achievable steps.
If your organization could benefit
from an approach to change that shows leaders
exactly how to transform a theoretical vision
into a thriving reality,
Kotter's model might be right for you.